Tutorial example for radiation pattern of a dipole using 1D calculation and Brillouin-zone integration (#2917)
NanoComp/meep: doc/docs/Python_Tutorials/Custom_Source.md

A point source in a 1D simulation (with discretization along $z$ and Bloch-periodic boundaries in $x$ and $y$) generates a planewave. A dipole can be modeled by combining the response from a series of planewaves using Brillouin-zone integration via the Fourier transform of the Dirac delta function:

$$\delta(x, y) = \frac{1}{2\pi}\int\int e^{i(k_xx + k_yy)}dk_xdk_y$$.

> The Fourier coeffcients of a Dirac delta function are a constant (1.0). This integral is calculated over a finite number of planewaves with in-plane wavevector $k_\parallel = (k_x, k_y)$ which are *inside* the light cone: $|k_\parallel| < n_s\omega$ where $n_s$ is the refractive index of the source medium and $\omega$ is the frequency. (Note that $c = 1$ per convention in Meep.) The wavevector of the radiating planewave is $\vec{k} = n_e\omega(k_x, k_y, k_z)$ where $k_z = \sqrt{(n_e\omega)^2 - k_x^2 - k_y^2}$ and $n_e$ is the refractive index of the emission region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Fourier coeffcients of a Dirac delta function are a constant (1.0). This integral is calculated in principle over the entire $(k_x, k_y)$ plane, but in practice only terms with in-plane wavevector $k_\parallel = (k_x, k_y)$ that are *inside* the light cone: $|k_\parallel| < n_s\omega$ contribute to the far field, where $n_s$ is the refractive index of the source medium and $\omega$ is the frequency.  This finite-domain integral can then be discretized into a sum over a finite set of $k_x, k_y$ by a numerical-integration rule. (Note that $c = 1$ per convention in Meep.) The wavevector of the radiating planewave from each $(k_x,k_y)$ Fourier component of the source is $\vec{k} = n_e\omega(k_x, k_y, k_z)$ where $k_z = \sqrt{(n_e\omega)^2 - k_x^2 - k_y^2}$ and $n_e$ is the refractive index of the emission region.
```

The 1D cell is truncated with PML in the $z$ direction. One limitation of this approach is that the set of wavevectors used in the Brillouin-zone integration must be restricted to lie within the *interior* of the light cone (i.e., at some distance away from the light line). This is because planewaves with wavevectors near the light line ($|k_\parallel| \approx n_e\omega$) propagate at glancing angles to the PML (i.e. along the $x$ or $y$ directions) and are therefore [not absorbed](https://meep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/FAQ/#why-are-the-fields-not-being-absorbed-by-the-pml). In this example, the set of wavevectors is restricted to those within 95% of the light line. This is not a major limitation in practice because the radiation in the direction to the parallel to the surface of the LED cannot be easily measured using a [goniophotometer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goniophotometer).

> Another feature of the calculation to note is the radial Poynting flux which is computed as $P_r = \hat{r} \cdot \vec{P}$ where $\hat{r} = (\sin(\theta)\cos(\phi), \sin(\theta)\sin(\phi), \cos(\theta))$ and $\vec{P} = (P_x, P_y, P_z)$. By Poynting's theorem, the total flux in the 1D simulation is $P_z$ (i.e. $P_x$ and $P_y$ are ignored) which means $P_r = \cos(\theta) P_z$. The 1D simulation therefore involves a single flux detector for $P_z$ in the emission region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting the correct scaling is a bit tricky.  The total flux per unit area is $P_z$ by Poynting's theorem.  Recall that this is being integrated over $(k_x,k_y)$ in the expansion of the delta function, so $P_z$ is the total flux per $d^2 k = k_{\rho} dk d\phi $ in cylindrical coordinates, but what we *want* is the flux per solid angle, and so there is a $k_{\rho} = k \cos \theta$ Jacobian factor that we need to divide by in order to obtatin the flux per solid angle.  Thus, our final answer is given by $P_z / \cos \theta$.

Another feature of the calculation to note is the radial Poynting flux which is computed as $P_r = \hat{r} \cdot \vec{P}$ where $\hat{r} = (\sin(\theta)\cos(\phi), \sin(\theta)\sin(\phi), \cos(\theta))$ and $\vec{P} = (P_x, P_y, P_z)$. By Poynting's theorem, the total flux in the 1D simulation is $P_z$ (i.e. $P_x$ and $P_y$ are ignored) which means $P_r = \cos(\theta) P_z$. The 1D simulation therefore involves a single flux detector for $P_z$ in the emission region.
```
